# -Most-Dangerous-Counties-
Most Dangerous Counties by Traffic Fatality Rates (per 100,000 persons)
Aims:  Transportation policy-makers have shown an interest in exploring trends related to traffic fatalities across the US. Our study observes traffic fatalities incidence rates (per 100,000 persons) from a national perspective and state-level perspective, to showcase various social, environmental, and safety trends. 

Methodologies: The following data sources were assessed within our study: National Highway Traffic Safety Administrations’ Fatality Analysis Reporting System, National Land Cover Database 2016, USDA Economic Database, CDC Drug Mortality Database. We extracted non-motorist fatal crash data from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administrations’ Fatality Analysis Reporting System. Following, we aggregated and integrated mentioned datasets by US county and year, for the years 2010-2016. Thus, we had a uniform dataset capturing national traffic fatality counts, land coverage percentages, development percentages, health indicators, and socio-economic factors. The fusion of various datasets allowed our team to analyze social, environmental, and safety annual trends within the US, by US county (2010-2016). 

Summary statistics were calculated and assessed; including the average, median, and variance. These summary statistics were calculated to assess social, environmental, and safety trends at the national-level. After retrieving these baseline national measurements for the observed factors, we ranked national traffic fatality rates (per 100,000 persons) per US county, for all study years combined (2010-2016). The Top 10% bracket categorized US counties with the highest traffic fatality rates within their respective boundary, either at the national level or state level. We identified the Nation Top 10% and state Top 10% bracket of US counties with the highest traffic fatality rates (per 100,000 persons) throughout the study period. Within each Top 10% bracket, we calculated annual summary statistics to observe social, environmental, and safety trends within this “high-risk” group. 

The Top 10% bracket, grouping US counties with the highest traffic fatality rates within their respective boundary, were also calculated at the state-level for the following 20 states: Washington, Oregon, California, Montana, Colorado, Nebraska, Kansas, Texas, Minnesota, Illinois, Michigan, Tennessee, Mississippi, Georgia, Florida, Pennsylvania, New York, Vermont, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire. These 20 states were randomly selected, selecting about 5 states per US region. Finally, we repeated statistical steps at the state-level, observing a Top 10% bracket with the highest traffic fatality rates per US state (2010-2016), and then observing relevant annual trends. 

Findings:  Overall our findings suggest that traffic fatality rates (per 100,000 persons) are significantly higher in US counties with low population and rural settings. These trends vary, depending on the national context or state-level context. At the national-level, the Top 10% bracket median traffic fatality rate (per 100,000 persons) between 2010-2016 was about 48.6 deaths per 100,000 persons, with a median population of 6,276 persons. The national median traffic fatality rate (per 100,000 persons) between 2010-2016 was about 22 deaths per 100,000 persons, with a median population of 25,917 persons. In year 2014, we observed the highest median traffic fatality rate (per 100,000 persons) for the Top 10% bracket, at 77 persons per 100,000 persons compared to the national median of 23 persons per 100,000 persons. 

Along with traffic fatality trends, we observed national socio-economic, geographic and street network trends. Approximately 95% of the Top 10% US counties with the highest traffic fatalities in the nation identified as Census “Rural”. About 48% identified as USDA “Rural, Less than 2,500 persons, not adjacent to metro area.” Furthermore, 25% of crashes occurred on FHWA road classification “Principal Arterial – Other”, and 20% occurred on “Principal Arterial – Interstate”. Socio-economically, the poverty rate of the Top 10% bracket was about 17.1% (per 100 persons), and the international migration rate was about -0.24% (per 100 persons).

States Top 10% bracket of traffic fatality trends and observations significantly differed from national trends; depending on the state and the number of counties contained within observed state boundaries. The state with the observed highest median traffic fatality rates was Kansas, at about 50.2 deaths per 100,000 persons and 10 counties represented in the Top 10% bracket. New York had a lower median traffic fatality rates than the national average, at about 16.8 deaths per 100,000 persons and about 6 counties represented in the Top 10% bracket. In addition, Kansas had low median population count of about 2,821 persons while New York had a higher than median population of about 40,392. Furthermore, Georgia had higher traffic fatality rates than the national average, at about 44.2 deaths per 100,000 persons; additionally, Georgia had a significantly high median poverty rate of about 26.9% (per 100 persons). 

A consistent observation we found between the state-level analysis and the national-level analysis is that all US counties grouped in the Top 10% bracket of the highest traffic fatality rate (per 100,000 persons) were at least 95% identified as Census “Rural” setting. This suggests that counties of rural settings and with low populations have higher risks of having the highest traffic fatality rate, normalized by population.
